An Init Container is a specialized container that runs before your app containers start inside a Kubernetes Pod. They are exactly like regular containers, but with two strict rules:
	1	They always run to completion.
	2	Each init container must complete successfully (exit 0) before the next one starts.
If a Pod's init container fails, Kubernetes will repeatedly restart the Pod until the init container succeeds.
Why Use Init Containers? (Common Use Cases)
Init containers are perfect for separation of concerns. They allow you to keep your main application image lightweight and secure by keeping setup tools out of your production image.
	•	Waiting for Dependencies: Delaying your app startup until a database or an external API is online.
	•	Running Setup Scripts: Downloading a configuration file, registers a node, or generating encryption keys.
	•	Database Migrations: Running schema updates before the web app boots up.
	•	Permissions Setup: Changing file permissions (chown or chmod) on a mounted volume so the main app (running as a non-root user) can access it.
Standard YAML Definition
Init containers are defined in their own block (spec.initContainers) inside the Pod spec, right alongside the standard containers array.
YAML






apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: app-with-init
  labels:
    app: my-app
spec:
  # 1. The Init Container runs first
  initContainers:
  - name: wait-for-postgres
    image: busybox:1.36
    command: ['sh', '-c', 'until nc -z -v -w3 postgres-service 5432; do echo "Waiting for database..."; sleep 2; done']
  
  # 2. The Main Application Container only starts after the init container exits successfully
  containers:
  - name: main-web-app
    image: node:20-alpine
    ports:
    - containerPort: 8080
5 Critical Rules of Init Containers
1. Sequential Execution
If you have three init containers (A, B, and C), they run one after the other in that exact order. If Container A fails, Container B will not start. The main app container will only start once all init containers have successfully finished.
2. No Health Probes Allowed
Because init containers are meant to run a quick task and exit, they do not support livenessProbe, readinessProbe, or startupProbe. A readiness probe makes no sense because the pod cannot be marked "Ready" until the main app container is running anyway.
3. Resource Inheritance (The Math)
When Kubernetes schedules a Pod on a worker node, it calculates the CPU and memory requests/limits based on a unique rule:
	•	It looks at the highest resource request among all init containers.
	•	It looks at the sum of all resource requests for the main app containers.
	•	It takes whichever number is larger as the Pod's total effective resource request.
4. App Changes Don't Affect Init Containers
If a main app container crashes and restarts while the Pod is running, the init containers do not run again. They only run once per Pod lifecycle (during the Pod's initialization).
5. They Can Share Volumes
Init containers can mount the exact same volume as your main app container. This is how an init container can download data, write it to a /shared-data directory, and hand it off to the main app container perfectly.
Sidecar Containers (A Modern Exception)
Starting in Kubernetes 1.29+, you can define an init container with a restartPolicy: Always. This turns it into a Sidecar Container.
Unlike standard init containers, a sidecar container will start before the main application but will continue running in the background for the entire lifetime of the Pod (great for logging agents or service meshes like Istio).





Here is a practical, production-ready example demonstrating how an init container downloads data into a shared volume, which the main container then reads.
In this scenario, we use an emptyDir volume. This volume exists as long as the Pod is running on that node, making it the perfect temporary "scratch space" for sharing data between containers in the same Pod.
The YAML Manifest
YAML






apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: init-shared-volume-demo
  labels:
    app: static-web
spec:
  # 1. Define the shared storage volume at the Pod level
  volumes:
  - name: shared-data
    emptyDir: {} # Creates an empty directory on the host node for this Pod

  # 2. The Init Container runs first to fetch the data
  initContainers:
  - name: data-fetcher
    image: alpine:3.18
    command: ["sh", "-c"]
    args:
    - |
      echo "Starting data download..."
      wget -O /app/data/index.html https://www.wikipedia.org/
      echo "Download complete!"
    # Mount the shared volume here
    volumeMounts:
    - name: shared-data
      mountPath: /app/data # Where the init container writes the file

  # 3. The Main App Container starts after the download finishes
  containers:
  - name: web-server
    image: nginx:alpine
    ports:
    - containerPort: 80
    # Mount the exact same volume into the Nginx HTML directory
    volumeMounts:
    - name: shared-data
      mountPath: /usr/share/nginx/html # Nginx automatically serves files from here
Step-by-Step Breakdown of the Execution:
	1	Volume Creation: Kubernetes creates the shared-data volume (emptyDir) on the worker node. It starts completely empty.
	2	Init Container Phase: The data-fetcher container starts up. It mounts the volume at /app/data. It runs the wget command, downloads the Wikipedia homepage HTML file, saves it directly into /app/data/index.html, and exits successfully (exit 0).
	3	Transition: The data-fetcher container is destroyed, but because the volume belongs to the Pod, the downloaded data remains safely intact on the node.
	4	Main Container Phase: The web-server (Nginx) container starts up. It mounts that exact same shared-data volume directly into its default HTML serving directory (/usr/share/nginx/html).
	5	Serving Traffic: When Nginx boots, it looks in its HTML directory and finds the index.html that was just put there by the init container. It serves that webpage to users.
Why this is a security best practice:
Your production nginx image doesn't need wget, curl, or any network fetching tools baked into it. If a malicious actor compromises the web server, those utilities aren't available for them to download external attack scripts, drastically shrinking your container's attack surface.
